---
description: "2.\tEthics for Career Counseling"
---

# Page 6

Most professional associations endorse a code of ethics that guides the ethical behavior of their members. In many cases, the code of ethics identifies the central values that undergird the profession. For example, the American Counseling Association (2014) code of ethics outlines the principles of enhancing human development throughout the lifespan; honoring diversity and embracing a multicultural approach in support of the worth, dignity, potential, and uniqueness of people within their social and cultural contexts; promoting social justice; safeguarding the integrity of the counselor–client relationship; and practicing in a competent and ethical manner. The ACA Code notes that these principles are the foundation for the ethical behavior and guiding values for counselors of autonomy, or fostering the right to control the direction of one’s life; nonmaleficence, or avoiding actions that cause harm and beneficence, or working for the good of the individual and society by promoting mental health and well-being; justice, or treating individuals equitably and fostering fairness and equality; fidelity, or honoring commitments and keeping promises, including fulfilling one’s responsibilities of trust in professional relationships; and veracity, or dealing truthfully with individuals with whom counselors come into professional contact. In other words, counselors work to not harm their clients but do work to benefit their clients. Counselors treat clients fairly, honor their obligations, fulfill their responsibilities and are honest. These principles form the foundation of counselors’ effective work with clients. Career counselors are ethically bound to follow the 2014 ethical guidelines of the American Counseling Association (found at www.counseling.org), and we encourage readers to consult these guidelines for further information. Career counselors also are bound to follow the 2015 ethics code of the National Career Development Association; this chapter will focus on the NCDA ethics code. As the NCDA code states, “A code of ethics helps to define professional behavior and serves to protect the public, the profession, and those who practice within the profession” (p.1). It helps to guide the appropriate decisions and actions to take with a client. The Code helps to answer when to keep a client’s confidence, what to do when a client is also seeing another therapist, how to manage challenges when working online, or how to appropriately use and interpret a career assessment.
