# Page 20

### 7. Identify a Career that Fits your Values.(How to Assess Your Career Values )

When considering a new job or career, your career values count as one of the most important factors that will guide your choices. You'll also sometimes hear them referred to as "work values." Knowing what you value in a job and workplace can help you evaluate career options to consider and assist you with choosing a job that's the best fit for your values. What Are Career Values?

Your career values represent the beliefs you have about what is important in your work, and what makes it meaningful to you. Simply put, your career values are what steer and drive you in your professional career. These values will help when you decide on a potential company or position for employment. What Do You Want From a Job?

People look for different things in their jobs. Some crave prestige, while others seek a creative outlet. Still others want flexible hours and independence. The list of desires can include earning a high income and meeting and interacting with people. Of course, the chance for advancement in the career field is also a primary driver of why people will choose any particular position. Once you figure out what you value, you'll have the answer to what motivates you to do your best job, and you can use this knowledge to guide your employment choices. Career Satisfaction

Some career theorists believe that how well a job or career satisfies our values should be the most important consideration when evaluating options. These theorists posit that work which lines up with our values will be more meaningful, and we will be more likely to invest our energies to master the roles and achieve success. Most career experts recommend considering personality traits, interests and abilities in conjunction with values when making career choices. Identifying Your Values

One way to identify your career values is to look at a list of examples and rate how much each of the items matters to you. Rate the list on a scale of one to ten. Then examine some of the highest-rated values and choose six to 10 that should have the greatest weight when considering career and alternatives. You can also separate these descriptive terms into categories, such as who, what, where, and workload. Instead of a numerical ranking system, you may choose to rank the terms using: • Must have • Nice to have • OK not to have • Must not have

### 8. Career Counseling in Postmodern Times: Emergence and Narrative and Conception

“I define postmodern as incredulity toward meta-narratives.” —J. F. Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge

For several decades, social, economic, and political forces have aligned to make work more unstable in Western societies, including in the United States. Shaped by a global economy and propelled by information technology, the new social arrangement has been characterized by uncertain and precarious employment opportunities (Kalleberg, 2009). This restructuring has diminished the standardized job, changed the relationship between worker and employer, and posed a threat to personal meaningfulness. As society moves from high modernity to postmodern times, existing career theories do not adequately account for today's unpredictable and rapidly changing occupational structure (Savickas, 2011a). Established paths and narratives that once guided many people's career progression have eroded. New demands require individuals to repeatedly revise their identities, accept more responsibility for managing their own lives, and invest in their families and communities for stability. Client questions such as “How do I fit in?” or “How do I advance my career?” have transformed into concerns such as “Who am I?” or “Where can I find purpose?” Postmodern career counseling emphasizes the importance of meaningful work and of holding oneself together while developing a career (Savickas, 2011b). Counselors now ask themselves an implicit question: How do we counsel clients when security and stability in the workplace are no longer guaranteed? In this chapter, I provide an overview of how postmodern career counseling answers this question. Drawing on sociological theory and thought, I first discuss how societal and organizational narratives within each work era provided external guides for people to help them feel secure in an increasingly precarious work environment. I examine some factors responsible for how work in a postmodern era has diminished the standardized job, changed the psychological contract between worker and employer, and affected people's identities. Then I propose a new metanarrative for postmodern society, highlight implications for culturally diverse groups, and conclude with a brief discussion on narrative career counseling in culture and conte
