# Page 15

#### Group-Level Variables

We begin our discussion of group-level variables by noting the tension between wanting to treat all group members the same and overemphasizing those differences. Hare-Mustin and Marecek (1988) provided a useful distinction on these two perspectives in studying the social construction of gender: One perspective emphasizes the differences between men and women, and the other minimizes those differences. They characterized the former perspective as prone to alpha bias, or the tendency to exaggerate differences, whereas the latter perspective is prone to beta bias, or the tendency to ignore differences. We can extend these perspectives to many of the group-level variables discussed in this section. Alpha bias is the predominant view in U.S. society and underpins most psychological theories about gender. These theories propose fundamental gender differences as constellations of opposing traits or characteristics (such as feminine vs. masculine, instrumental vs. expressive). Beta bias, on the other hand, has received less attention but also exists in many theories of psychological development, particularly in the assumption that psychological development is the same across all races and for all types of sexual orientations. Beta bias is evident in theories and practices that attempt to treat men and women, and individuals of all races and sexual orientations, equally, yet may inadvertently perpetuate inequality. One consequence of alpha bias is that observed sex or race differences (or differences between other groups) may be overinterpreted as essential qualities, when they may be due to differences in the social hierarchy. For example, demonstrated sex differences in vocational interests, such as women’s interest in social activities, may not be due to women’s inherent relational nature but because social-type careers include lower prestige occupations that are more accessible to women. Consequences of beta bias are more subtle in nature and, on the surface, may seem trivial. After all, what’s wrong with arguing for little difference between men and women or different racial groups and therefore treating them similarly? However, ignoring special needs of women or men, or the influences of racism on psychological development of racial/ethnic minorities, may also underestimate differential allocation of resources and power and ultimately disadvantage women, men, or minority group members. Hare-Mustin and Marecek (1988) point out that “in a society in which one group holds most of the power, seemingly neutral actions usually benefit members of that group” (p. 460). In the realm of career and educational attainment, Betz (1989, 2005) discusses the “null environment” in which individuals are neither encouraged nor discouraged but simply ignored. The null environment, according to the originator of the concept (Freeman, 1979), has a greater effect on women because of the cumulative effect of negative messages about their pursuit of career goals. Heppner (2013) suggests that counselors be alert for women’s implicit foreclosure of occupations because of gender biases and develop mechanisms to gently challenge those biases. By the same token, it can be argued that similar concerns need to be explored with men who foreclose on traditionally female occupations.

#### Gender

It is axiomatic to say that gender is important throughout an individual’s life. Baby clothes and blankets are color-coded (pink for girls, blue for boys), toys are gender specific (trucks for boys, dolls for girls), and from an early age, boys and girls demonstrate (or are rewarded for demonstrating) different interests. It seems reasonable that these different expectations of behavior on boys and girls would result in different career choices. Until the 1970s, gender socialization practices traditionally expected girls to be helpers and boys to be prepared to be providers for their families. These different expectations led to separate career trajectories and decisions, with women either choosing not to work or choosing to stop in and out of the work environment as they took primary responsibility for their families. The effect on men was to considerably restrict their options and their ability to be involved with their families. Although the past five decades have witnessed dramatic changes in workforce participation by women and greater options for men, the traditional socialization patterns and messages have continued to exert subtle influences on the work decisions of both men and women. Many authors have argued that traditional theories of career development are really theories about and for White, middle-class males, so it is natural to focus our attention to how career theory and practice may better serve women. But clearly, men also are influenced by gender socialization and the gendered context in which they make career choices. Societal expectations of the male gender role and what types of occupations are appropriate for men may restrict the range of options of occupations. However, the enormous societal changes that have occurred for women brought about changes for men as well—in their conceptions of the role of work in their lives, in the expectations that are placed upon them by society, and in the structure of the family and interpersonal relationships. It is still important to note that gender socialization occurs for both males and females in this society, beginning from birth onward, through childhood, adolescence, and into adulthood.
