# Page 13

1. **Cultural contexts and Career Counseling.?**

Mark, a White career counselor specializing in midlife career transitions, has two new clients. The first is an African American lesbian from a conservative Muslim family who is seeking to change careers in her 40s. Mark has been trained to consider culture and so knows that he needs to have an understanding of the cultural values of African Americans, of career issues facing lesbians, and of the Muslim faith that may suggest conflicts between the client’s sexual orientation and faith. He plans to ask the client which of her cultural contexts are most salient to her (race, sexual orientation, faith, age) and where she is feeling conflict. He wants to know her career history and how discrimination may have shaped her choices and perceptions of opportunity. Mark’s second client is a White man in his 50s who is considering taking a new position in another company prior to retirement. Because they are the same race, Mark does not ask his client about cultural context. Because they are both men, Mark assumes that work plays a similar role in his client’s life as it does in his own. Thus, he misses key information about the client’s social class and upbringing and the importance of his role as a provider that would have helped him be more effective. The client was raised in considerable poverty in rural Nebraska, had to drop out of high school to support his family, and was able to work his way up the corporate ladder without the typical education his position requires. It is very important to him to be the primary provider for his family. His consideration of a new position is shaped strongly by the need for job security and fear of judgment about his lack of education. These two cases highlight that all clients operate within a cultural context, which helps form their environments and their responses to the environment. Clients’ contexts must be taken into consideration in developing hypotheses about clients because contextual factors shape clients’ approach to work, the messages they receive about appropriate work, and the role that they want work to play in their lives. But, as we highlighted in the example of Mark, it is critical that career counselors first have a foundational understanding of the potential influences of context on their own perceptions and worldviews as well as on their clients’ perceptions and worldviews. The NCDA Career Counseling Competencies mandate that the competent career counselor “is aware of his/her own cultural beliefs and assumptions and incorporates that awareness into his/her decision-making about interactions with clients/students and other career professionals” (p. 1). In this chapter, we discuss the need for an understanding of the implications of various contextual factors on work-related decisions and how that becomes integrated into career counseling. By context we mean clients’ psychological perspectives and world views that are shaped by their background, including such aspects as their culture, race/ethnicity, gender, social class, sexual orientation, religion, and/or disability status. Individuals’ contexts may shape their decisions in several ways. For some, cultural values or family expectations shape the type of work they will choose to do or feel is appropriate. For others, choices are limited by real and perceived barriers, such as limitations due to racism, sexism, or heterosexism. Career counselors must have an understanding of the potential role of context in clients’ lives. This is the foundation of culturally responsive career counseling.

#### Culturally Responsive Career Counseling

Culturally responsive career counseling is good for all clients. All clients come to counseling with unique biological, social, and developmental experiences that are products of the cultures to which they belong. It is also critical to note that belonging to a culture does not automatically mean that a client will display one characteristic or another. Rather, there is great heterogeneity within groups. Counselors need to be flexible enough to incorporate the cultural variables salient to the client. This requires that the counselor has developed multicultural competencies and is prepared for culturally appropriate counseling (Sue & Sue, 2015). While we discuss various contextual factors that may influence clients’ work-related decisions, it is beyond the scope of this chapter to address all possible contextual factors that clients bring to counseling. We refer readers to Sue and Sue (2015) for general multicultural counseling considerations and Brown and Lent (2013) and Blustein (2013) for in-depth discussion of contextual factors related to career counseling. A central tenet of culturally appropriate career counseling is that effective career counselors do not treat all clients the same, assuming their cultural experiences are uniform, but will approach each client as belonging to one or more cultures. For example, a client may be an Asian American man married to a White woman, working in a company headed by an African American, and living in an ethnically diverse, middle-class neighborhood. He may feel that he belongs to several cultures; some may be more salient to him than others. His counselor needs to be aware of his multiple cultures and how they interact. The client’s goals will reflect his cultural contexts, indicating which are most salient to him. Culturally appropriate counseling requires that the counselor have knowledge and skills to work with specific cultural groups. A counselor working with Hmong clients in the Midwest needs to know the history of the Hmong immigration to the United States, the development of their written language, and their cultural norms and values. A career counselor working with a transgender client needs to understand the issues relevant to the transition from one sex to another and the workplace concerns of transgender individuals. A counselor working with a woman who is seeking to be an electrical engineer will need to understand the issues for women choosing nontraditional occupations. But while counselors need to know certain group-specific issues, counselors also need to be aware of several overarching variables that may affect many clients.
