# Page 18

### 4. **Career construction Theory and Life Designing Paradigm.**

In the past several decades, substantial changes have occurred within the world of work, with a concomitant change to the field of vocational psychology, and new theoretical approaches are emerging in an effort to better explain career and work behavior (Fouad, 2007; Juntunen & Even, 2012; Pope, 2015). Theories of career development (or vocational choice) have shifted from a sole focus on the individual, to an explicit recognition of contextual factors, to a perspective that might be best described as a “person-in-complex-social-and-economic-systems” focus (Blustein et al., in press; Duffy, Blustein, Diemer, & Autin, 2016; Swanson, 2013). These newer approaches are characterized by several different primary emphases, including (a) equal valuing of work and relationship, or market and care work, (b) viewing work within a broader context of relational aspects, (c) expanding consideration of the experience of work beyond that of career, and (d) building on postmodern perspectives of work. These newer and emerging theories have been described as paradigm-shifting (Richardson, 2012), in that they represent a radical departure from previous views and an opening up of new perspectives to understanding behavior and events that would previously have not been considered valid. These newer perspectives represent a marked departure from foundational theories, yet there also are clear continuities with the earlier theories. For example, Frank Parsons (1909/1989), who is credited with launching the field of vocational guidance, published his landmark work in response to social change occurring at the beginning of the 20th century, and the newly emerging and contemporary perspectives may also be characterized by their responsiveness to social change (Juntunen & Even, 2012).

### Applying Career Construction/Life Designing

Career construction theory focuses on the subjective elements of Leslie’s career history and present situation, through the process of self-construction, as well as her level of career adaptability.

### Conceptualizing Leslie’s Career History

As a child and adolescent, Leslie began to build a story about herself as a teacher and helper. She internalized the message from her parents about the importance of achievement but did not develop a strong sense of how that achievement would be expressed in the world through occupational roles. In terms of the four dimensions of career adaptability, as an adolescent and young adult, Leslie seemed to have an appropriate level of concern about her career, including understanding the importance of making plans for the future. Regarding the second dimension of control, Leslie at times seemed to cede control to others, such as her family and boyfriend, which may have led to her indecision about career choices. Messages from her family may have increased her indecision, since they encouraged the lessened centrality of the occupational role in her life. Leslie’s decisions about career, then, were frequently made with clear reference to her current relationships and informed by expectations conveyed by her parents about the relative roles of work and family; her initial decision to become a high school teacher was an effort to combine work and family. Despite not totally mastering control, she did demonstrate curiosity about her career alternatives, as she developed interests and skills in mathematics. Finally, she demonstrated wavering levels of confidence, the fourth dimension, resulting in times when she has seemed stuck about how to move forward and unsure of her abilities.

### Conceptualizing Leslie’s Present Situation

In terms of career construction theory, Leslie is now reconstructing her occupational story by reevaluating her previous choices and whether to continue or change direction. Revisiting the four dimensions of career adaptability, Leslie’s decision to pursue career counseling demonstrates her concern about planning for the future and taking control over her future. Combining work and family is at the forefront given her expressed desire to have a child. Her relationship with Joe is also central to her current career issues, in terms of his reactions to her career concerns. Leslie also seems to have a fair amount of curiosity and confidence about her options.
