# Page 12

#### G. Supervision, Training, and Teaching:

Section G encompasses guidelines fostering professional relationships that career professionals have with students and supervisees. As supervisors, career professionals put clients’ welfare as paramount, monitor their supervisor's cases, and meet with them regularly; they make sure that students appropriately inform clients that they are in training, and follow ethical guidelines regarding informed consent (G.1.a through G.1.c). They ensure they are competent to provide supervision (G.2), maintain appropriate professional relationships with students and supervisees (G.3 and G.5.f), and appropriately provide students with evaluation (G.5.d, G.5.e, and G.5.g). The guidelines outline supervisor responsibilities (G.4) as well as student responsibilities (G.5). The latter includes students’ obligation to know the code, monitor themselves for impairment, and appropriately disclose their trainee status to clients (G.5.a through G.5.c). As educators, career professionals must be competent as teachers and practitioners (G.6.a and G.6.b) and clearly indicate when techniques are “unproven” (G.6.e). They are encouraged to integrate ethics into their teaching (G.6.c). They also ensure students are qualified for placements and sites are prepared for these students (G.6.f). Guideline G.6.f includes an explicit expectation that educators will ensure on-site supervisors are qualified to provide supervision. Educators provide appropriate information to students throughout their training and disclose in all public documents their expectations for self-disclosure. Students have a right to choose their educational program with clear understanding about the expected level of self-disclosure (G.7). Educators develop their programs with particular concern for faculty and student diversity and ensure multicultural competence is part of the curriculum (G.8).

#### H. Research and Publication:

Guideline H addresses the ethical practice of conducting research as a career professional (H.1). Career professionals must safeguard the rights of research participants and must not have personal relationships with research participants nor engage in research with those with whom they have a personal relationship (H.2 and H.3). They must report all results accurately and work to maintain the confidentiality of research participants (H.4). When publishing their work, they follow all the guidelines related to appropriate authorship credit and publication practices (H.5).

#### I. Resolving Ethical Issues:

The final set of guidelines addresses the processes and guidelines for resolving ethical issues. This includes potential conflicts between the Ethics Code and the law (I.1). When ethical violations occur, career professionals are encouraged to attempt informal resolutions prior to reporting the ethical violation (I.2). If formal complaints need to be made, they are done after professional consultation, and unwarranted complaints are prohibited. Career professionals are expected to cooperate with state and association ethics committees (I.3).
