---
description: The National Career Development Association NCDA (2015) Code of Ethics
---

# Page 7

The NCDA (2015) has designed 9 Codes of Ethics, that are as follows:

#### **A. The Professional Relationship**

Section A guides practitioners in all aspects of the professional relationship between career professionals and clients. A.1 focuses on the core aspects of working directly with “individuals to whom they provide services” (p. 3). This includes the importance of “doing good” and putting the welfare of the client first (A.1a), and outlines the types of services a career professional might use (planning vs. counseling) (A.1.b), also noting that practitioners provide only those services for which they are competent (competence is further discussed in Guideline C.2). Career professionals must carefully document the services and actions taken with clients and follow all applicable state and federal laws and regulations related to record-keeping (A.1.c). This includes carefully documenting amendments to documents, as well as knowing when documents should be purged. Career professionals are encouraged to work together with clients in forming and reviewing plans for services (A.1.d), and are encouraged to enlist individuals in the client’s social network on his or her behalf (with client consent) (A.1.e). A.2 addresses aspects of informed consent, which is the right of the client to have enough information to choose whether to engage in a professional relationship with a career practitioner. Practitioners must review, both verbally and in writing, the rights and responsibilities of the practitioner and client, and practitioners have an obligation to periodically review informed consent throughout services. A.2.b outlines information that should be in the informed consent, including types and length of services, billing, potential use of technology, and what might happen if the career professional were to be incapacitated. Client rights are also outlined in A.2.b, which include the right to confidentiality (and any limits), the right to know the information that is included in records, the right to participate in service planning, and the right to refuse services (and to be advised of the consequences of such refusal). Embedded throughout the entire code is the importance of cultural sensitivity, and in A.2, this is highlighted in communicating informed consent. The Code also addresses special cases of informed consent, such as for minors (A.2.d), or for clients mandated for services (A.2.e). The Code notes that minors, or others not able to give voluntary consent, still have the right to give assent to services. The guideline highlights the need for practitioners to balance clients’ rights to make choices that affect their lives with the responsibilities of families to act on behalf of their children. When working with clients who have been mandated for services, practitioners explain the services that will be provided, as well as what information will be shared about the outcome of services. Clients have the right to refuse services in this case, but practitioners have an obligation to review the consequences of such refusal. Sections A.3 addresses situations that often occur for career professionals, who may find out their expertise is solicited by clients working with other professionals. If this happens, practitioners seek a written release from clients to inform the other professionals. Career professionals must avoid harming clients, students, or research participants and are aware of their biases to avoid imposing values on their clients. (A.4.a and A.4.b). Section A.5 addresses aspects of roles and relationships with clients, some of which are prohibited, while others are discouraged. In general, career professionals should be aware of the potential for abuse of power when forming multiple roles with current or former clients. For example, sexual or romantic relationships are prohibited with current clients, their romantic partners, or their family members (A.5.a). Sexual or romantic relationships are also prohibited with former clients, their romantic partners, or their family members for at least 5 years (or a longer period as specified by state or federal law) (A.5.b). Career professionals are encouraged to avoid nonprofessional relationships with clients, their romantic partners, or family members (A.5.c). But, in the event such interaction might be beneficial (e.g., going to a wedding or graduation), professionals carefully document the interaction and benefit, as well as evidence of client consent (A.5.d). If the professional’s role changes (e.g., from individual to family counseling), clients are informed of the consequences of the role change (A.5.e). Career professionals are encouraged not to provide services to their own previous romantic partners or family members. If they do so, they are encouraged to seek consultation from another professional (A.5.f). Career professionals are encouraged to advocate at all levels (individual to societal) to examine and dismantle barriers for clients, with the consent of the client (A.6). If a career professional agrees to provide services to two or more persons, A.7 helps to identify steps to take to ensure that clients are not harmed, including clarifying the relationships and the need to withdraw from one or more of the services if the roles conflict. Career professionals who provide group services have additional steps to take to ensure client welfare, including the need to screen clients to ensure their needs are compatible with the level of service provided in the group (A.8.a) and the need to protect clients from harm (A.8.b). Guideline A.9 addresses fees and business practices, including not referring clients to their own private practice (unless the organization has policies that allow it), and making sure that fees are reasonable for their location and the client’s financial status (A.9.a and A.9.b). If professionals have policies to take legal action to collect fees, this must be in their informed consent documents, and they must offer clients the opportunity to make payment (A.9.c). Career professionals are encouraged to refrain from bartering with clients, or exchanging their services for a service provided by the client. Bartering may only be used if it is not exploitive or harmful, if the client requests it, and it is common in the community (A.9.d). Guideline A.9.e addresses when and how to accept gifts, encouraging professionals to take the cultural context of the gesture into account. The final section of Section A addresses termination of professional services. Career professionals are prohibited from abandoning clients (A.10.a), but if they believe they can no longer be of assistance to clients, they do not continue the relationship (A.10.b), suggesting alternatives or referrals. They are encouraged to terminate the relationship when the client is finished with career plans or is no longer benefiting from the relationship. If a transfer is made, the career professional makes all attempts to maintain an open communication between professionals (A.10.c and A.10.d).
