# Page 9

#### C. Professional Responsibility:

Section C of the NCDA Ethics Code focuses on the career professional’s responsibilities, including their responsibility to be competent, to be honest and accurate in advertising, and to be nondiscriminatory in their work. Career professionals know and comply with the standards and guidelines of the profession (C.1), and are enjoined from practicing outside the boundaries of their competence (C.2.a). Multicultural competence is expected as part of this guideline. When they seek new areas of specialty, career professionals seek appropriate education and/or supervision, and accept as work appointments only positions for which they are qualified (C.2.b and C.2.c.). Along with working within the bounds of competence, career professionals monitor their effectiveness, seeking supervision where necessary and consulting their ethical obligations as appropriate, and seek continuing education to maintain their competence (C.2.d through C.2.f). They are alert to their own impairment and take steps to seek assistance for their own physical and mental health when their impairment might harm clients (C.2.g). Competent career professionals make arrangements in the event that they have to terminate their practice. Similar to B.6.h, the latter includes making a plan for transfer of clients, if necessary, and identifying a records custodian, if they are no longer able to practice due to incapacitation or death. Guideline C.3 addresses accuracy and honesty in advertising and soliciting clients. Career professionals must be accurate in their advertising, only use testimonials from clients from whom they received permission, and make sure statements made by others about them are accurate (C.3.a through C.3.c). They do not recruit for a private practice through their place of employment, and only promote products accurately and with enough information to allow consumers to make an informed choice (C.3.d and C.3.e). Career professionals do not use their professional activities (consultation, teaching, supervision) to promote products in a deceptive manner (C.3.f). Guideline C.4 encourages professionals to claim only professional qualifications they have completed and to correct others’ impressions of them (C.4.a). Professionals should claim only their current licenses and the degrees they have earned, state their highest degree earned, and do not use the title “Dr.” if they have not earned a doctorate (C.4.b and C.4.d). They accurately indicate the accreditation status of their educational program at the time they graduated and accurately represent their professional memberships (C.4.e and C.4.f). Guidelines C.5 and 6 focus on nondiscrimination and public responsibility. C.5 enjoins career professionals from any discrimination on the basis of cultural identity, or discrimination against students, clients, employees or research participants. C.6 stipulates that career professionals do not sexually harass others, are accurate and honest in reports to third parties, are professional in all media presentations, including being consistent with the NCDA Code of Ethics, do not exploit others, base their treatment on current scientific foundations, and make an effort to provide services to the public pro bono (C.6.a through C.6.f). When working with other professionals, C.7 stipulates that career professionals make it clear when their statements are from their own personal perspective, as opposed to speaking for the profession. C.8 encourages career professionals to create policy statements and guidelines to use in their practice.
