# Page 14

#### Fouad and Kantamneni’s Three Dimensional Model

To help career counselors capture the complexity and intersections of various aspects of identity and how they influence career and work decisions, we have adopted the three dimensional model proposed by Fouad and Kantamneni (2008) and shown in figure below. The first dimension includes individual characteristics that influence work choices, such as interests, values, and abilities. These characteristics encompass the traditional areas that career counselors have emphasized: what a client is able to do, what a client is interested in, and what choices are consistent with the client’s values. We focus on assessing these constructs and, indeed the assessment of interests, abilities, and values forms the heart of much of career counseling. But the relationship between individuals’ interests, abilities, and values and the possible choices they consider are shaped by the second and third dimensions of the model. The group level variables in the second dimension encompass gender, race/ethnicity, social class, family variables, religion, sexual orientation, and relationships. Thus, individuals’ work choices are influenced not only by their own interests, abilities, and values but also by the messages they receive about appropriate and possible work based on those group-level dimensions. Some individuals, for example, would not consider an occupation in which the workers are mostly the opposite sex. Others might choose work that they would consider friendly to gays and lesbians, while still others might choose work in which they feel a spiritual calling. The third dimension is the broader society in which individuals live. Some individuals may feel they belong to the majority culture in the United States and their cultural values, such as achievement, recognition or helping others, influence their work choices and decisions. For others, the predominant values in their culture of origin differ from the majority culture, and these differences influence work decisions as well (including acculturation, discrimination, and cultural barriers). This third dimension also includes the societal effects such as educational systems, the labor market, and the economy.

#### Fig. Fouad and Kantamneni’s Three-Dimensional Model - Source: Fouad and Kantamneni (2008)

Kantamneni and Fouad (2019) have critiqued this model, noting that the cube model does not allow enough examination among factors within a dimension, such as the intersection between gender and social class, or social class and race, or how barriers and the labor market intersect. They also argued that more factors need to be considered, such as including age as a group-level factor, and adding public policies to the societal dimension. Career counselors should keep these critiques in mind, particularly considering intersections among variables. Researchers have examined the role of context in work choices and decisions over the past three decades, primarily examining group-level variables such as gender and race and the societal variables of acculturation and discrimination. More recently, research has focused on social class, sexual orientation, and religion/spirituality. We discuss selected group-level and societal level variables separately, but in real life, many aspects of context influence work decisions. For example, a Native American woman in her 30s may be influenced by her gender, her age, and her Native American values and how those differ from the majority culture values. She may not know which are important influences on her choices, but an effective counselor will help her explore those influences. The model portrayed in the figure above is a cube, highlighting the interaction among the various dimensions. More critically, although we assume interactions among dimensions, some may be more salient at one time than another. We finish our examination of context with a discussion of the practical implications of salience of intersecting aspects of identity.
