# Page 10

#### D. Relationships With Other Professionals:

Section D addresses two types of relationships with other professionals: D.1 focuses on interdisciplinary work with others, and D.2 on coaching and consultation. Career professionals are encouraged to respect professionals in other careers, work to develop strong interdisciplinary relationships, work with others to keep the focus on the client, and maintain the client’s confidentiality as much as possible (D.1.a through D.1.d). When part of a team, they work to clarify ethical obligations among team members and, if there is a conflict, work to resolve it within the team (D.1.e). They hire competent staff, and accept employment only in settings that have acceptable standards of conduct (D.1.f and D.1.g). If there are negative conditions, they attempt to effect change within the organization and, if not successful, report to appropriate agencies or organizations who have oversight (D.1.h). They take care not to harass or dismiss an employee who has raised concerns (D.1.i). When career professionals serve as coaches, they must make sure they have the appropriate competencies for the role, understand the consultee’s context and consequences of interventions, encourage the consultant's growth toward self direction, and insure to provide written informed consent for the consultant's review (D.2.a through D.2.c). In consultation, informed consent includes the definition of the problem, goals for change, and predicted consequences of interventions (D.2.d).

#### E. Evaluation, Assessment, and Interpretation

Section E of the Code focuses on ethical mandates for appropriate assessment. The ACA and NCDA collaborated with other educational professional associations to form the Joint Committee on Testing Practices (JCTP). This group developed the Code of Fair Testing Practices in Education (JCTP, 2004), which outlines the obligations for test users: Test users should administer and score tests correctly and fairly; should report and interpret test results accurately and clearly; and should provide clients with information about the instrument, the use of scores, and where to find more information about the instrument and results.

The NCDA guidelines address the appropriate use of assessment, in large part because unethical assessment practices may lead to significant client harm. Professional ethical codes emphasize that tests must be reliable and valid, that client welfare is paramount in the assessment process (E.1.a and E.1.b), and that counselors need to be competent in the tools that they use (E.2), also understanding the limits of their competence (E.2.a). Assessment tools must be used appropriately, and career professionals must have a thorough understanding of psychometrics and guidelines for assessment use (E.2.b and E.2.c). Career professionals are obligated to explain the nature and purpose of the assessment tools to clients, and consider the client’s welfare in determining who receives results (E.3.a and E.3.b). Career professionals do not release results with identifying information about the client unless the client consents, and then only to people who are qualified to interpret the results (E.4). There are a number of guidelines related to appropriate diagnosis, recommendations, and choosing instruments (E.5, 6). Assessment techniques should be carefully selected and implemented, and done so with cultural sensitivity (E.5.a and E.5.b). Career professionals must also recognize the potential of historical trauma of assessment with some cultural groups, avoiding perpetuation of prejudices (E.5.c). Career professionals also may choose to refrain from a diagnosis or recommendation if they believe it would cause harm (E.5.d). Professionals must consider validity, reliability, and appropriateness of instruments before choosing assessments (E.6.a). When they refer a client to a third party for assessment, career professionals provide specific referral questions to ensure appropriate assessments are chosen (E.6.b). Guideline E.7 directs career professionals in administering assessment tools. Assessments must be administered under the same conditions established in their standardization and the technology used must function well (E.7.a and E.7.b). Administration must be adequately supervised and administered under a favorable environment (E.7.c and E.7.d). Career professionals use caution when implementing instruments or assessment techniques normed on populations other than that of the client, particularly paying attention to dimensions of diversity that may affect assessment results (E.8). Career professionals also consider the client’s culture and how much he or she is able to understand the results before interpreting assessment results, realizing the potential impact of the results (E.9.a). They use caution to ensure the validity of the instruments they use (E.9.b). If career professionals use an assessment service (third party provider), they take care to make sure to confirm the validity of the instrument and interpretations (E.9.c). Career professionals are ethically bound to keep assessment tools secure, not use obsolete tools or results, and to use established procedures for constructing an instrument (E.10 through E.12). Four additional ethical guidelines focus on forensic evaluations used in legal proceedings. First, the primary obligation of the career professional is to be objective, basing their testimony on scientific evidence and defining the limits of their testimony (E.13.a). Informed consent includes ensuring individuals that the purpose of the forensic relationship is for evaluation, not career services (E.13.b). Career professionals do not evaluate current or former clients, their romantic or sexual partners, or their family members (E.13.c), which constitutes a multiple relationship. Further, career professionals do not provide forensic evaluations for their own family members, romantic partners, or close friends (E.13.d).
