# Page 11

#### F. Providing Career Services Online, Technology, and Social Media:

Section F guides career practitioners in the use of online services, technology, and social media. The ethics guidelines are very similar to the guidelines provided earlier, particularly in Section A, but acknowledge the additional security and technical concerns that are inherent in using online services. Online services may also occur when clients and professionals are in different states or even countries, adding additional layers of legal concerns. For example, if career professionals engage in providing services online, they must be competent not just in the services they provide, but also in the technology and legal issues surrounding those services (F.1.a. and F.1.b), particularly if services cross state or national boundaries. They may seek help from others for legal and technical assistance (F.1.c). Informed consent is more complicated when not done face to face, and F.2.a details the information that must be added to informed consent for online services. Clients must be informed of the limits of confidentiality when services are conducted online, and career professionals are bound to take extra precautions for security (F.2.b and F.2.c). Career professionals must take the extra steps to verify the client’s identity (F.3). Guideline F.4 discusses issues related specifically to providing services online, including the benefits and limitations of using online services, and the need to maintain (and discuss with a client) professional boundaries, as often online services are provided and received in personal homes (F.4.a and F.4.b). The onus for ensuring the client’s ability to use technology rests with the career professional, as does ensuring that clients have reasonable access to technology (F.4.c and F.4.d).

Professionals understand the differences between face-to-face services and technology-provided services and how that might affect the relationship and career development process (F.4.e). In addition to the guidelines in Section E related to assessment, career professionals must ensure that the assessments used are appropriate for online delivery and validated for self-help use, that confidentiality is ensured, and that referrals are available within the client’s geographic area if the client does not understand the results (F.4.f). This section of the Code includes guidelines related to maintaining electronic records and maintaining a professional website (F.5 and F.6), which include that the website is up to date and functional (F.6.a). Career professionals often use online services to help clients with job searching and assessment, and it is incumbent on them to provide access to those services for individuals with disabilities, make sure the website developer has input from a career professional, and that any job postings are valid openings (F.6.b and F.6.d). Several guidelines in F.7 focus on the ethics unique to using social media, including ensuring that professionals who create a virtual presence in social media keep it up to date and accurate, keep their professional and personal social media sites separate, and make sure they are accurate in presenting their training and qualifications on the site (F.7.a through F.7.c). Confidentiality and privacy are particular concerns in Guidelines F.7.d and F.7.e, noting that clients’ identities must be protected and their privacy respected. Social media must be part of informed consent (including the limitations of social media use), the use of social media strategies must be developed with a consideration of fair and equitable treatment, and professionals must realize that information on social media sites are relatively permanent (F.7.f through F.7.h), thus necessitating extra care for privacy settings and information about clients. Career professionals posting information on social media sites must be concerned about copyright status of original sources (F.7.i). Finally, career professionals are encouraged to educate their clients about the role of social media in the career development process (F.7.j).
