# Page 16

#### Race/Ethnicity

Just as gender has a strong role in career and work-related choices, so does an individual’s race and ethnicity. We have noted previously that there is large occupational segregation by race/ethnicity, as well as gender, with an overrepresentation of racial/ethnic group individuals in the lower socioeconomic status (SES) levels and overrepresentation of White men in higher SES levels. The strong relationships between SES and educational attainment and occupational level have led to a continuous cycle of poor and poorly educated minority men and women (Arbona, 1996; Kenney & Walsh-Blair, 2012; Worthington, Flores, & Navarro, 2005). Discrimination has also played a role in keeping individuals trapped in this cycle. Overt sexism and racism are outlawed in the United States, but unfortunately, covert sexism and racism are still facts of life for women and racial/ethnic minorities and often limit the options that individuals may consider and restrict their access to a wide variety of opportunities (ByarsWinston, Fouad, & Wen, 2015; Byars-Winston, Kantamneni, & Mobley, 2012). In addition, the relationship between discrimination and poverty has a particularly disproportionate effect on racial/ethnic groups and single women, including negative effects of discrimination on mental health (Roberts, Swanson, & Murphy, 2004).

#### Relational and Familial Influences

Traditional notions of career development suggest that work choices are made individually. However, researchers and career counselors are increasingly acknowledging the role that relationships and family play in career decisions (Blustein, 2011; Lustig & Xu, 2018; Richardson, 2012). Researchers have shown that positive family relationships can help individuals feel free to explore various careers while negative relationships can restrict behaviors leading to career exploration (Blustein, Schultheiss, & Flum, 2004; Richie et al., 1997). The role of family in influencing career decisions differs by culture and gender (Fouad et al., 2010; Whiston & Cinamon, 2015), and it is important for career counselors to ask about messages that clients may have received from their family about work and careers.

#### Social Class

A major criticism of the field is that it has neglected the concerns of poor or working class individuals when compared to middle class or wealthy individuals (Blustein, 2006). Yet social class clearly is an influential factor in career development. Social class is fundamental in shaping access to resources and influencing career aspirations, development, and eventual career attainment (Blustein et al., 2002; Brown, Fukunaga, Umemoto, & Wicker, 1996; Diemer & Ali, 2009; Fouad & Brown, 2000). For example, lower income students are less likely to be raised in homes with enriched learning environments, less likely to receive career guidance and information from their parents, and less likely to have strong career expectations, which leads to lower career attainment (Flores, Navarro, & Ali, 2017; Fouad & Byars-Winston, 2005).

Difference from Mainstream Culture

The United States includes individuals from many backgrounds who bring values and perspectives from their own culture of origin, who may then encounter conflicting experiences and messages related to the world of work in the larger mainstream United States. Recent qualitative studies have highlighted this experience, as racial/ethnic minority individuals described having to navigate between two cultures (Gomez et al., 2001, Juntunen et al., 2001). Participants, all who had successful careers, reported essentially developing a bicultural identity that allowed them to incorporate values from both cultures in making work related decisions. Two factors influence the way that individuals navigate between two cultures. The first is acculturation, which describes the way individuals change, accommodate, or adopt the cultural patterns of the “host” society (Kohatsu, 2005). Some individuals completely acculturate to the United States; some are able to be bicultural, retaining the cultural patterns of their culture of origin and adopt certain patterns of the United States; and still others are unable to accommodate or acculturate to the United States. As may be clear, the role of acculturation can be very influential in perceiving and obtaining work in the United States. However, despite actual and perceived barriers, many individuals successfully achieve. Returning to the qualitative studies described earlier (e.g., Gomez et al., 2001; Juntunen et al., 2001; Richie et al., 1997) participants noted sources of resilience in the face of barriers, including support from their families, a strong sense of identity, and feelings of passion about their work. Bicultural individuals also have been found to be satisfied and have a strong sense of well-being, highlighting the strengths and resilience that comes with operating in two cultures (Quintana, Chew, & Schell, 2012). Career counselors are encouraged to ask clients about sources of cultural strengths.
