# Page 8

#### B. Confidentiality, Privileged Communication, and Privacy:

Section B of the NCDA Ethics Code focuses on the importance of earning and maintaining trust, upholding professional boundaries, and maintaining confidentiality. B.1 emphasizes respecting clients’ rights, including an understanding of cultural meanings of confidentiality, clients’ rights to privacy, and confidentiality (B.1.a through B.1.c) and the need to explain any limits to confidentiality (B.1.d). Guideline B.2 outlines exceptions to confidentiality, or when state and professional standards dictate a need to disclose what a client has said. Specifically, career professionals will disclose confidential information if they need to protect the client or others from harm (such as a threat to harm someone, or disclosure of child or elder abuse). They also are justified in disclosing information about a communicable and life-threatening disease if the third party is identifiable and at high risk of contracting the disease (B.2.a and B.2.b). When career counselors are ordered by a court to release confidential information, they inform the client of the request, obtain written consent to disclose information, and try to prohibit the disclosure, or limit as much as possible the amount of information disclosed to minimize harm to the client (B.2.c). The importance of maintaining confidentiality is extended to subordinates, treatment teams, settings and third-party payers, noting in the latter that clients must authorize disclosure to third-party payers (B.3.a through B.3.d). Guideline B.4 focuses on confidentiality and privacy in group settings. Career professionals must explain the limits of confidentiality for groups, as well as for multiple family members (B.4.a and B.4.b). In the case of working with multiple members of a family, it is important to consider who is the “client.” It is also important to maintain confidentiality for minor clients or those who cannot give consent, noting the responsibility to minor clients but also to parents and guardians who are responsible for those minors (B.5.b). If confidential information is to be released about someone who cannot give voluntary consent (e.g., a minor), consent must be sought from a responsible third party, such as a parent (B.5.c). Guideline B.6 addresses matters related to client records, including that documentation is current and records are kept secure (B.6.a). Permission is obtained from clients prior to recording or observing them (B.6.b and B.6.c). Clients have the right to their records and career professionals are encouraged to provide reasonable access to records, including providing assistance in understanding them (B.6.d and B.6.e). Written permission is needed to transfer records to a third party (B.6.f). Records are stored for an appropriate length of time in accordance with state and federal laws, but are then purged (B.6.g). Career professionals are encouraged to take precautions to safeguard a client’s confidentiality if they terminate their own practice, appointing a records custodian (B.6.h). Guideline B.7 applies to career professionals in the research realm. Researchers must be accurate with their proposals and obtain institutional approval for research, adhere to federal, state, and institutional guidelines regarding research, maintain participant confidentiality and privacy, as well as any limits to confidentiality (B.7.a through B.7.c). Researchers do not disclose information that could lead to participant identification, and if they use quotes that may identify clients or research participants, those individuals must review the material and agree to the presentation (B.7.d and B.7.e). When acting in a consultant capacity, career professionals discuss confidentiality among the participants in the consultation, as well as the limits of confidentiality, make every effort to protect the privacy of individuals, and do not disclose confidential information that might lead to identification of a client without prior consent (B.8.a through B.8.c).
