---
description: The Structure of Career Counseling
---

# Page 5

Based on our discussion of the nature of career counseling, the next task is to consider a way to organize the work of clients and counselors in career counseling. Can the work of clients and counselors in career counseling be organized into phases and subphases? If so, how are the phases and subphases arranged and sequenced? Are they interrelated? Beginning with Parsons (1909), many writers have described possible ways to structure career counseling (Amundson et al., 2009; Crites, 1981; Kidd, 2004; McDaniels & Gysbers, 1992; Savickas, 2011). For the purposes of this book, the structure of career counseling that we suggest has two major phases (Client Goal or Problem Identification, Clarification, and Specification and Client Goal or Problem Resolution) and a number of subphases. We see the working alliance evolving during career counseling—moving from forming the working alliance, to strengthening it, to fulfilling it, to finally closing it upon completion of career counseling. How important is a good relationship? Amundson (2006) stated it this way: “All counseling interventions are dependent on the foundation of a good relationship” (p. 7). (A full discussion of the working alliance—including setting goals, establishing tasks to be completed, and creating the bond between counselor and client—appears in Chapter 8.) Keep in mind that all of the phases and subphases of career counseling may take place during one session, but more likely they will unfold over a number of sessions. In some agencies and institutions, policies dictate the number of sessions possible. In this case, it is important that clients and counselors understand these time constraints and make decisions about what can be accomplished in the time available. In these situations, there may be agreed-upon unfinished business when the relationship is closed. Also keep in mind that, although these suggested phases and subphases logically follow one another on paper, in actual practice they may not. There often is a back-and-forth flow to career counseling in that it may be necessary to backtrack to earlier phases or subphases before moving on again. Sometimes one reaches the taking action subphase only to realize that other interventions not anticipated may be needed, which necessitates a return to the gathering client information subphase. To picture this point, you can see that the phases and subphases of career counseling presented in linear outline form in Table 1-1 are placed in a circular format in Figure 1-1. Note how the working alliance evolves and interacts with the phases and subphases and how central it is to the structure of career counseling. Finally, keep in mind that not everyone who seeks help wants or needs to go through the full process of career counseling. Some may want or need only limited assistance. Other clients, however, may need to be involved in the full process over time but may be resistant to this. Dealing with resistance may be a first priority in the opening subphase as the working alliance is beginning to be formed. Even if resistance is seemingly handled then, be aware that it may reoccur again and again, perhaps later in career counseling as some clients struggle with their problems. Remember, for these clients, dealing with recurring resistance is part of the psychological processes involved in career counseling.
