# Page 4

History alone, however, is not a sufficient reason to continue to use the term career counseling. There is another reason—the need to focus attention on client problems dealing with work and career issues that require theoretical conceptions and interventions originating from career development theory, research, and practice. These needed theoretical conceptions and interventions are not usually found in the literature that surrounds other forms of counseling. At the same time, theoretical conceptions and interventions that emerge from and undergird personal–emotional counseling perspectives are not usually found in the literature that surrounds career counseling. According to Collin (2006),

Career represents the coexistence of the objective and the subjective, both the social reality and the individual’s experience of it; even when the focus is on the former, the latter, though submerged, is still present. Career also represents other dualities: individual and collective, and rhetoric and praxis. Its two faces make a career inherently ambivalent. It is not “either/or” but “both/and,” making career a very powerful and fascinating construct that can continue to offer meaning for the twenty-fi rst century. (p. 63)

In the worlds of today and tomorrow, theoretical conceptions and practical interventions from both the career and personal–emotional arenas are needed to work effectively with many clients (Fouad et al., 2007). Our starting point should be our clients, not predetermined distinctions of counseling. Zunker (2002) made this same point when he stated, “We are not just career counselors, we counsel individuals” (p. 7). The emphasis on client problems to guide and work with clients was suggested by Blustein and Spengler (1995) in their domain-sensitive approach:

A domain-sensitive approach refers to a way of intervening with clients such that the full array of human experiences is encompassed. The goals of such an intervention are to improve adjustment and facilitate developmental progress in both the career and non career domains. The term domain pertains to the scope of the client’s psychological experiences, encompassing both career and non career settings. By following domain with the term sensitive, we are attempting to capture counselors’ inherent openness, empathy, and interest with respect to both the career and non career domains and their ability to shift between these content domains effectively. In effect, a domain-sensitive approach is characterized by the counselor’s concerted interest in and awareness of all possible ramifications of a client’s psychological experience and its behavioral expressions. In this approach, the counselor clearly values the client’s experiences in both the career and non career domains. The counselor bases a decision about where to intervene on informed judgments about where the problem originated and where it is most accessible for intervention. (p. 317)

In the domain-sensitive approach, the career problems clients have are not automatically converted to personal–emotional problems because career (work) issues require full attention in the career counseling process (Blustein, 2006). Nor are personal– emotional problems automatically converted to career problems. “The underlying asset of a domain-sensitive approach is that interventions are not based on discrete or arbitrary distinctions between treatment modalities but are determined by the unique attributes of each client’s history and presenting problem” (Blustein & Spengler, 1995, p. 318). The terms career counseling and personal–emotional counseling should remain as ways to organize theory and research but not as ways to restrict our view of clients and limit our work with them. Many years ago, Super (1955) stated it this way: “One counsels people rather than problems” (p. 4).
